Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Shilpa Nagar (BSMSN)
The BSMSN site is located 200 kilometers (km) from Dhaka, 60 km from Chattogram, 70 km from Chattogram Port and the Shah Amanat International Airport and 330 km from Sylhet. The BSMSN Master Plan area is covered in the two districts, three upazilas, and 6 unions and comprised of 26 mouzas.

BSMSN has a total land area of 33,805 acres or 136.86 square kilometers (km2) (mostly reclaimed land) with a 25 km coastline along the Sandwip Channel in the Bay of Bengal. The land elevation on the site varies from the site’s lowest point at -3.33 meters (m) MSL to the highest point at +8.71m MSL.

Before development of the BSMSN, the site was comprised of: i) 27.6% idle/barren lands, ii)31.65%mangroves/forest/vegetation, iii) 8.71% water bodies/canals and iv) 6.53% under development. The site location is a moderate to high monsoon climatic area with an average annual rainfall of 500mm. The average temperature on the site varies between 15-25 degrees Celsius annually.

The value proposition of BSMSN:

BSMSN is the flagship, ‘smart city/economic zone’ project for Bangladesh and a ‘game changer’ in economic zone design and development.
To be the premier, international work, live, play location and an urban/industrial hub in South Asia.
Strategically located for easy access to domestic and international markets.
Offering a multi-modal transport and logistics platform incorporating a port, rail, roads and airport connectivity to reduce congestion, delays, costs and increase efficiencies as well as strengthen supply chains.
Spearheading state-of-the-art, green and resilient infrastructure, utilities and technology to make BSMSN competitive, efficient, sustainable and resilient.
Targeting innovative foreign and domestic investors.
Promoting exports, clean industry/manufacturing, value addition production utilizing cutting-edge technology, and supporting new industry trends and enhanced creativity.
Aids in transferring knowledge, technology and innovation to local entrepreneurs, professionals and workers
Offering a safe and secure environment, which is monitored on a 24/7 basis for investors, residents, workers, and visitors
Offering an OSS with streamlined and fast-tracked processes and procedures as well as after-care facilitation
Offering a competitive labour pool with new types of professional, technical, skilled and unskilled jobs for Bangladeshi
The BSMSN Master Plan sets out: i) land uses, ii) access and transport networks, iii) precinct boundaries and characteristics, iv) zoning and permitted uses, v) development guidelines, and iv) environmental and green resilient rules to follow when implementing the zone. The BSMSN site has been divided into 12 separate precincts, which have their own land uses. Although specific plots have not been assigned in the master plan (except for within the industrial areas), it is intended that real estate projects following the designated/assigned land uses and design guidelines will be constructed over time and sold/leased at competitive market rates. The precincts, (their land use and size) for BSMSN are identified below.

